---
layout: post
title:  "What is Web3?"
date:   2022-04-03 21:48:43 +0530
categories: web3
---
I thought this is a worthwhile question to answer. At the end of this post, you will hopefully have a mental model for thinking about web3.

First, let’s look at the evolution of the web.

The Web or the internet is only 2 things. Network and Data. The network is the wifi, the wires and the software that helps you connect to services. The network is usually invisible. Data is the information you experience on the web - the blogs, music, movies, etc. Data is usually visible.

### Web0

Web0 was a bunch of computers connected with wires forming a network. You could build pages and all computers on your network could access your pages. Nobody outside your private network could access your information.

**NETWORK AND DATA ACCESS WAS PRIVATE.**

### Web1

Someone thought, what if we connected all these isolated networks? That way any computer could connect to any other computer anywhere in the world. So they put up bigger wires and now the internet was born.

On the internet, anyone could build web pages and anyone in the world who was part of the inter-connected networks could access your web pages.

**NETWORK ACCESS WAS MADE PUBLIC. DATA WAS FOR READING ONLY.**

### Web1.5

Engineers could write code and publish web pages on the internet. Someone thought, hey the users can read things, what if we let users write things on to the internet as well - without them having to code web pages?

They built web pages where users could write things and it would show up on the internet for everyone to read. Wow! Web pages now were web applications.

Users could write blogs and upload images. To make this work, users now needed to create accounts, manage passwords, had their data saved within the applications. Most web applications allowed users to export or delete and update their data.

**THE NETWORK WAS PUBLIC. USERS COULD MANAGE THEIR DATA. DATA WAS SAVED BEHIND THE APPLICATIONS.**

### Web2

The Internet continued to be accessible. More and more people joined the internet. Soon it became evident it was a cost-effective mechanism to distribute digital information. Now the question was what can we convert to digital information?

Digitisation began.

Text, images, audio, video were digitised and distributed. Anything that could be digitised using these formats was converted. Books, Music, Movies, Magazines, Catalogs, Human Communication, Business Processes, Money, Contracts, Signatures… you get the idea.

With every converted entity, new applications were born.

Control over data was valuable. You could control the supply and nature of information delivered to alter user behaviours.

Then someone thought, what if we could digitise human personalities?

Based on what users were doing on the internet, secondary data like their likes, dislikes, interests, relationships, preferences, opinions - their whole personalities were digitised.

With the digitisation of this new entity, new applications were born - targetted advertising being the dominant use case.

Now, this data is fully owned by the corporations building the applications. Users have no control over this information.

We’ve come far, here is the classification for tl;dr :

**Primary data** - Posts, Images, Videos, Audio, etc. that users upload to the internet. Users have full access to this data. They can update or even delete this information from the applications.

**Secondary data** - Information about the user’s personalities which is derived from their behaviour on the internet.

THE NETWORK WAS PUBLIC. PRIMARY DATA WAS OWNED BY USERS AND SAVED BEHIND APPLICATIONS. SECONDARY DATA WAS OWNED BY CORPORATIONS.

### Web3

Web3 is a promise that users of the applications will be able to own their data, earn from it and know exactly how the application is using their data. They will even be able to contribute to how the applications and the organisations that build them function. Let’s break this down.

Let’s see how the data-ownership part works.

Data ownership would be solved by creating applications that save information on public blockchains. Blockchains are public databases where data once written, cannot be altered. Since blockchains are public - any application can access the data, but only with the permission of the users.

To illustrate this assume that you want to move from Facebook to Google Plus. You can simply remove Facebook’s permission to access your data and give it to Google Plus. All your posts, images, video, comments, likes, etc. move as-is to Google.

That is the promise.

Technically nothing stops Web3 companies to copy your data to their private servers once they have access to it. Also, if deleting or updating your data is part of your idea of ownership, then we are sorry. You cannot do that. Blockchains do not allow data modification.

This was all about primary data. What about the secondary data? Nobody knows. This information would probably be saved by the Web3 companies on their private databases. We now know that this information is valuable. User’s cat images are not valuable - that the user is likely to spend tons buying digital cats is valuable information. Given that this information is generated by privately owned algorithms, it would be costly to just make it public. So secondary data seems to be working the same way in web2 and web3. This is at odds with the promise of web3.

So, how does web3 fix this problem?

What if Web3 companies were a new kind of company with no owners and managed by the community which includes both the developers and the users? Then the users can control what is done with their data. Think of public companies but with their governance digitised so all decisions are taken jointly by the participating community.

These organisations are called DAOs. DAOs are Decentralised Autonomous Organisations. How efficient DAOs are is still to be seen.

Most Web3 companies are not DAOs and are founder-led, for-profit companies.

How these companies make money is what will decide how web3 pans out.

**THE NETWORK IS PUBLIC. PRIMARY DATA ACCESS IS OWNED BY USERS. SECONDARY DATA IS OWNED BY CORPORATIONS.**

In summary, web3 is a promise where users own both the network and data. How this pans out depends on the economics of this new version of the internet.